take these two 16-valve golf GTI's one's
an 87 e reg with 60,000 up the other a
few months old with just a handful of
miles on the clock put them on the
grunting thought test ranks safely away
from the public roads bury the throttles
and watch the difference some cars grow
old disgracefully but the GTI loosens up
in its middle age and just gets better
and better for all its miles the older
car goes like a banshee at the end of
the two mile straight there's a clear
six car lead for the silver machine
often imitated but rarely bettered the
mark to Golf GTI still remains the
longest lasting and best handling car in
its class at 60,000 miles this 16-valve
feels like it's just running for 4,000
pounds what this one cost here's a car
which can chew the coattails of
supercars five times the price this is
an early mark to GTI an 84 be in a car
like this today would cost between two
and two and a half thousand and most of
them look as straight and as original as
this body stripes and alloy p wheels
distinguished the earliest mark tues
along with what the Germans considered
to be a cheerful interior but amazingly
they still had left hand drive wipers by
late nineteen eighty-seven the wipers
were the right way round the P wheels
alas became an option and side body
mouldings appeared to the interior
Heller was a lot less garish leggy 87
start at three thousand rising two for
nab it for a really proper car good
value when you think an F reg Cavalier
would relieve you of nearly 6 grand
and the mini wonder wagon the 16-valve
offers the best value of the lot capable
of 30 to the gallon and 125 miles an
hour 16-valve spotters will be keen to
note the forged alloy wheels slightly
lower ride height rakish ly angled roof
aerial and these little catch me if you
can 16-valve badges on its bottom the
interior is gloomy and the non assisted
steering heavy but the multi-valve GTI
has to be the performance car bargain of
the year this 30,000 miler will give you
change from five grand and you can
forget the rumors of unreliability
basically the 16-valve does use oil when
it's brand new and it will use oil if
it's used you know I revs all the time I
micholi the Rings down sale until
they've done about 10,000 miles but we
found a 16-valve that's probably done
80,000
tall as for the grim subject of
insurance we got it down to four hundred
and seventy pounds fully comp for 30
year old living in Leicester and that's
for the 16-valve er 1990 16-valve cars
come with BBS wheels rounded bumpers and
power steering is standard if you can
run to its 7,000 buys a fine Jeep later
don't skimp on tires though Michelin n
XV is just grip and grip and grip be on
your guard for stolen recovered GTI is
is quite appeared than floating about
now while they're not the end of the
world and usually it's just a question
of a missing radio may be missing seats
and wheels you can always tell a
sterling recovered by the fact that
we'll have more than one key because the
ignition lock and the doors have been
forced this one is a rather radical
example has been picked clean but it'll
probably go back on the road again
because it's fundamentally a straight
shell it's far better than something
like this which is a damaged repaired GT
on has just come out the paint shop when
you're buying a secondhand GT I think
accident and there are certain places on
the car which can tell you it had any
drama or not down here where the wing
meets the bulkhead is a favourite if
it's had a frontal Biff you'll see
creases where the wings hit the screen
pillar check the door gaps to you could
drive a coach and four through this one
opinions vary on body kits but I reckon
they're often there to hide a multitude
of sins under the bonnet is where you'll
find most of the clues if we look under
this one the first thing that alerts my
suspicions is that little yellow sticker
down there belongs here which means that
the bonnets been painted look a bit
closer and we can see it's a very orange
e pili finish and then in this little
hole i can see signs of the original
tornado red which means this is bond has
been put on and resprayed inspect the
inner wings and the bulkheads for signs
of distortion flaking paint and recent
repairs these white stains are signs of
rub down filler and Cathy insulation
like this means someone's been here
before you now I've nothing against
damage of parables per se on two
conditions the first is that you know
it's a car that's been repaired so you
pay damaged repairable money and
secondly the job has been well done in
the case of GTI's they need to be jigged
and if it hasn't been jig properly it
will never ever handle or corner right
jigs are used to align a distorted body
shell to a precision of millimeters they
walk away from anything that's been
forged of the half a million gold sold
in Britain a hundred thousand have been
GTI's so there's a huge infrastructure
of independent specialists will service
the thing for around 85 quitter throw if
it's a 16-valve ax run it on super
unleaded with synthetic oil and change
the cam belt every 60,000 miles if like
me you find your local volkswagen audi
parts department can't help with
sensibly priced trim parts panels
bumpers light clusters and wheels and
some of them really are mad money I know
a man who can this place may not look
much but it's stacked to the rafters
with secondhand GTI parts all of them
perfectly usable and less than half
price he's called Horus and his grills
cost 45 pounds against vw's 140 150 quid
buys you a tailgate VW one 272 a seat
will make you sit up at seven hundred
pounds Horace says it's yours for 25
parts which you should buy from VA G and
mechanical things like exhausts now this
is a copy exhaust but the original
exhaust is fitted with the GTI's capable
of lasting up to four years and 80,000
miles so it's a false economy to fit
anything else cheaper ones don't last as
long affect the performance and make
more noise and if its performance you're
after the GTI lend itself extremely well
to specialist tuning this 16-valve is
bored out from 1.8 2 2-liters developing
an extremely healthy 179 brake
horsepower to you and me that means a
highly illegal 135 miles an hour judging
by their image on the street most people
reckon they're plenty quick enough in
standard tune are the street image of
the GTR always a school way out it's got
nothing
we've got survivors in no class with any
other car on the road Astro 16 lovexx or
3x or tues iris turbos you know the
image and other six grammys way out
compared to them the mileage on mine is
a thirty-five thirty-six thousand danger
is just loosening up now already right
now I don't want anything else quite
happy with the 16
time was you had to face serious money
for a Golf GTI but since grown inspiring
insurance premiums of all but decimated
the hot-hatch market they're all over
the place here we are at a Midlands
auction site and we're falling over
things there are five in here and ate
outside today this pretty ear edge 87
50,000 mile 8-valve GTI has sold from
very cheap 2850 my guess is that they
won't stay this cheap for long so now's
the time get out there and get amongst
it